21.0.0.9 GA blog release - Staging (#1685)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2021-09-03-microprofile-21009.adoc

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18009[Wrong char count in ServletOutputStream with non-ASCII characters skips content]
+
A bug was discovered where the `ServletOutputStream` would skip characters when using `print` or `println` to print content with multi-byte non-ASCII characters. This bug was fixed by changing the `WCOutputStream` to write the length of the encoded bytes rather than the length of the original string.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18002[@Schema(multipleOf = ) throws NumberFormatException in mpOpenAPI-2.0 feature]
+
In the `mpOpenAPI-2.0` feature, a `NumberFormatException` could be incorrectly thrown when using the `multipleOf` attribute of the `@org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Schema` annotation. With `multipleOf = 1`, the server shows:

[source, java]
----
[INFO] [ERROR ] CWWKO1650E: Validation of the OpenAPI document produced the following error(s):

> [INFO]

Reviewer: This isn't java code.

[INFO] - Message: The Schema Object must have the "multipleOf" property set to a number strictly greater than zero, Location: #/components/schemas/...
----

> This issue was fixed by updating the `multipleOf` validation check, to ensure that it is checking that `multipleOf` is greater than zero, rather than one.

Reviewer: This didn't fix the `NumberFormatException`, just the validation message

** <<mpHealth3_1, MicroProfile Health 3.1>>
* <<transaction, Transaction Peer Recovery>>
* <<tbasic, TBASIC Logging Format>>
* <<activeEndpoints, New method to determine active endpoints>>

View the list of fixed bugs in link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues?q=label%3Arelease%3A21.0.0.9+label%3A%22release+bug%22[21.0.0.9].

[#run]
== Run your apps using 21.0.0.9

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], here are the coordinates:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.openliberty</groupId>
    <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
    <version>21.0.0.9</version>
    <type>zip</type>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[21.0.0.9,)'
}
----

Or if you're using Docker:

[source]
----
FROM open-liberty
----

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/[Downloads page].

[link=https://stackoverflow.com/tags/open-liberty]
image::img/blog/blog_btn_stack.svg[Ask a question on Stack Overflow, align="center"]

[#mp4_1]
== MicroProfile 4.1

> MicroProfile 4.1 improves developer experience with updates to the Health feature. MicroProfile 4.1 also defines compatible implementation requirements for runtimes, which must pass all of the MicroProfile component specification `TCKs` including Config 2.0, Fault Tolerance 3.0, Rest Client 2.0, Health 3.1, Metrics 3.0, Open Tracing 2.0, Open API 2.0, and JWT propagation 1.2. The previously made available Open Liberty 21.0.0.9-beta release served as the compatible implementation for releasing MicroProfile 4.1, and the 21.0.0.9 release marks our first official release to include the feature.

Reviewer 2: remove backticks around TCKs

In the previous versions of MicroProfile Health, there were no unique APIs or endpoints to distinguish the start up status of your microservices. MicroProfile Health 3.1 introduces a new convenient `@Startup` annotation to create your own health check procedures to verify that your microservices have fully initialized. The status of the Startup health checks of your microservices can be viewed with the new REST endpoint `/health/started`. You can now configure the Kubernetes Startup probe with this new endpoint as well. In Open Liberty, you can use the Startup endpoint, `/health/started`, to verify if your deployed applications have started or not.

> When deployed application(s) are not started yet, the overall default Startup status will be DOWN, with an empty payload response until all the deployed application(s) have started. A new MicroProfile Config property (`mp.health.default.startup.empty.response=UP`) is available to change the overall default Startup check status to `UP`, during application start up.

Reviewer 2: put backticks around DOWN

In a cloud environment such as OpenShift, Open Liberty servers can be dynamically created or deleted, for example, to handle variations in system load. This possibility poses a problem for applications that use transactions. The sudden removal of a server instance might occur during two-phase commit (2PC) processing and leave transactional resources locked. This update alleviates this problem by allowing the configuration of Open Liberty servers to automatically recover transactions on behalf of other servers. This process is called peer recovery. 

You can configure it by specifying the `recoveryGroup` and `recoveryIdentity` attributes in the `transaction` stanza of your `server.xml` file, as shown in the following example:

[source, xml]
----
<transaction
...
recoveryGroup="peer-group-name"
recoveryIdentity="${HOSTNAME}${wlp.server.name}"
...
/>
----

For more information regarding the Transaction Manager service, reference the server configuration link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/config/transaction.html[docs for transaction].

[#tbasic]
== TBASIC Logging Format

> A new logging format `TBASIC` has been made available for both `consoleFormat` and `messageFormat`.  Although a `BASIC` logging format already existed for `consoleFormat`, `messageFormat`, and `traceFormat` the output differed between `traceFormat` and `consoleFormat` and `messageFormat`.  The new `TBASIC` format has been added to match the existing `BASIC` format that was already available for `traceFormat`, providing the ability to have consistent formatting across all three logs.  The `TBASIC` format has also been added as a logging format for `traceFormat`, acting as an alias for the existing `BASIC` option.

Reviewer 2: Although a `BASIC` logging format already existed for `consoleFormat`, `messageFormat`, and `traceFormat` the output differed between `traceFormat` and that of the `consoleFormat` and `messageFormat`.

----

You can also change the format by editing the `server.env` file and adding the following lines:

[source]
----
WLP_LOGGING_MESSAGE_FORMAT=TBASIC
WLP_LOGGING_CONSOLE_FORMAT=TBASIC
----

TBASIC Logs Example:

[source, role="no_copy"]
----
[24/03/21 15:04:10:331 EDT] 00000001 FrameworkMana A   CWWKE0001I: The server defaultServer has been launched.
[24/03/21 15:04:11:338 EDT] 00000001 FrameworkMana I   CWWKE0002I: The kernel started after 1.177 seconds
[24/03/21 15:04:11:465 EDT] 0000003e FeatureManage I   CWWKF0007I: Feature update started.
[24/03/21 15:04:11:635 EDT] 00000033 DropinMonitor A   CWWKZ0058I: Monitoring dropins for applications.
----

[#activeEndpoints]
== New method to determine active endpoints

The `ServerEndpointControlMBean` can currently be used to pause and resume endpoints, including `HTTP` and messaging ports. It can also determine if an endpoint is currently paused. However, there is no way to determine programmatically if an endpoint exists and is active. This update provides a new method on the `mbean`, `isActive`, that will determine if an endpoint exists, has started, and is not paused.
A new method was added to the `ServerEndpointControlMBean`:

> `public boolean isActive(String targets);`

Reviewer 2: wrap this in a code block:

```
[source, java]
----
public boolean isActive(String targets);
----
```

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/16700[Improve featureUtility performance with remote repository]
+
Previously, the `featureUtility` would take a long time to resolve features when using a remote repository with a slow network. Artifacts would be fetched one at a time which slowed things down dramatically. This issue was fixed by fetching and downloading multiple artifacts at the same time from Maven repository.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18237[Ignore FFDC for IOExceptions in handleMessage]
+
A bug was discovered where first failure data capture (FFDC) files were incorrectly produced. This would happen when bad JSON data was passed to REST APIs that are using the `jaxrs-2.1` feature with `BYO Jackson`. This issue could occur when a JAX-RS resource or provider throws any `IOException`, and was fixed by preventing FFDC from logging the `IOException`.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18155[JSF faces-config parser throws NPE when namespace missing]
+

> Previous changes made for Jakarta Faces 3.0 added logic to check for the new `https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee` namespace in `faces-config.xml` files. Because the new logic uses `String.contentEquals()`, if a `faces-config.xml` file declares a version but not a namespace, a `NullPointerException` would be thrown during app startup. To fix this issue, the logic has now been changed to use `String.equals()`. Please note that while the NullPointerException has been fixed, valid `faces-config.xml` descriptors should declare valid namespaces, ie. `http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee`, `http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee`, or `https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee`.

Reviewer 3: @mbroz2 pointed out a clarity issue with https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18155 - can you add a line (perhaps a new third sentence) along the lines of `This issue affected all JSF versions on Liberty.` ?

To fix this issue, the logic has now been changed to use `String.equals()`. Please note that while the NullPointerException has been fixed, valid `faces-config.xml` descriptors should declare valid namespaces, ie. `http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee`, `http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee`, or `https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee`.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18009[Wrong char count in ServletOutputStream with non-ASCII characters skips content]
+
A bug was discovered where the `ServletOutputStream` would skip characters when using `print` or `println` to print content with multi-byte non-ASCII characters. This bug was fixed by changing the `WCOutputStream` to write the length of the encoded bytes rather than the length of the original string.

> * link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18002[@Schema(multipleOf = ) throws NumberFormatException in mpOpenAPI-2.0 feature]

Reviewer: The text used for this link is wrong (`NumberFormatException` was not involved) and also does not match the title of the issue it links to. (It doesn't necessarily have to match it exactly, especially if you can word it better for the blog, but at the moment it says something completely different.)

Reviewer: I note as well that more than just the mpOpenApi-2.0 feature was affected - though the issue only talks about mpOpenApi-2.0. I'll update the issue to be clear that older versions of mpOpenApi were also affected.

+

> In the `mpOpenAPI-2.0` feature, a `NumberFormatException` could be incorrectly thrown when using the `multipleOf` attribute of the `@org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Schema` annotation. With `multipleOf = 1`, the server shows:

Reviewer: `NumberFormatException` was not thrown, a validation error was output incorrectly (as shows in your example).

There was a separate issue where a `NumberFormatException` was thrown, but that isn't fixed yet.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17682[Exception stack trace is exposed in error returns from JMX REST APIs]
+
When Liberty's `JMX` REST APIs encounter errors, a JSON object is returned which has a string field labelled 'stackTrace' containing the stack trace from the exception which caused the error. Returning the stack trace was flagged as a security concern, so this field has been removed. An extra string field labelled `error` has been added to the returned `JSON` object, containing the message from the java exception.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17912[New Netty 4.1.66 release]
+
We've pulled in the latest release of the Netty project, which is a dependency of our grpcClient-1.0 feature. This new release includes multiple improvements and bugfixes, for more information see the link:https://netty.io/news/2021/07/16/4-1-66-Final.html[Netty release notes].

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17444[Incorrect Expression Language (EL) Method Matching with Varargs]
+

> An `el-3.0` performance patch, for Open Liberty issue link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/14175[#14175], in 21.0.0.3 inadvertently ported over new `varargs` matching code, which later exposed a bug in that code. The EL implementation would select the wrong method if `varargs` were used when overloading a method.  The code has since been updated upstream in the Tomcat community (see Bugzilla Issue 65358), and it has also been port over to Liberty. 

Reviewer 4: An `el-3.0` performance patch, for Open Liberty issue link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/14175[#14175], **released in** 21.0.0.3 inadvertently ported over new `varargs` matching code, which later exposed a bug in that code. The EL implementation **could** select the wrong method if `varargs` were used when overloading a method. The code has since been updated upstream in the Tomcat community (see Bugzilla Issue 65358), and it has also been **ported** over to Liberty.

As for the fix itself, the `el-3.0` implementation has been updated to select methods as closely as possible to the Java compiler. However, due to ambiguity in the EL spec and the additional EL requirement of type coercion, the EL implementation may select different methods when `varargs` are defined. For more details please read link:https://bz.apache.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=65358#c9[comment 9 in the Bugzilla issue] explaining the priority of matching. If an unintended method is selected under these circumstances, we recommend reworking the method definitions.
The equivalent fix for expressionLangauge-4.0 (currently in beta) will be included in 21.0.0.10. 

== Known issues

link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18393[SPNEGO does not work with Java 11 or higher]
+

> In this release, a regression was introduced which prevents the `Krb5LoginModule` class from being found when authenticating using Kerberos on Java 11 or higher. This issue can cause users to be presented with an `Error 403` or `Authentication Failed` when authenticating using the `spnego-1.0` feature.

Reviewer 2: There is a '+' rendering on the site.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3076261/131901809-04930f88-0d84-432c-b99d-d3993ae93098.png)

To fix this issue, the logic has now been changed to use `String.equals()`. Please note that while the NullPointerException has been fixed, valid `faces-config.xml` descriptors should declare valid namespaces, ie. `http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee`, `http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/javaee`, or `https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/jakartaee`.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18009[Wrong char count in ServletOutputStream with non-ASCII characters skips content]
+
A bug was discovered where the `ServletOutputStream` would skip characters when using `print` or `println` to print content with multi-byte non-ASCII characters. This bug was fixed by changing the `WCOutputStream` to write the length of the encoded bytes rather than the length of the original string.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/18002[@Schema(multipleOf = ) validation check is wrong in all versions of the mpOpenAPI feature]
+

> In the `mpOpenAPI` feature, an incorrect validation message could be incorrectly displayed when using the `multipleOf` attribute of the `@org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Schema` annotation. With `multipleOf = 1`, the server shows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `mpOpenAPI` features, an incorrect validation message could be displayed when using the `multipleOf` attribute of the `@org.eclipse.microprofile.openapi.annotations.media.Schema` annotation. With `multipleOf = 1`, the server shows:
```
